Proposal for adding Self healing feature in the operator (#145)
strimzi/proposals: 092-self-healing-using-cruise-control.md

# Self Healing using Cruise Control

This proposal is about enabling the self-healing properties of Cruise Control in the Strimzi operator.
The self-healing feature of Cruise Control allows us to heal the anomalies detected in the cluster, automatically. 
Anomalies are detected by Cruise Control using the anomaly detector manager.

## Current situation

During normal operations it's common for Kafka clusters to become unbalanced (through partition key skew, uneven partition placement etc.) or for problems to occur with disks or other underlying hardware which makes the cluster unhealthy.  

> Currently, if we encounter any such scenario we need to fix these issues manually i.e. if there is some goal violation and the cluster is imbalanced then we might move the partition replicas across the brokers to fix the violated goal by using the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource in the [`rebalance`](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying.html#proc-generating-optimization-proposals-str) mode.

Reviewer: There is no `rebalance` mode. Did you mean `full`? Anyway I would not specify it, because it's possible you could even decide to scale up the cluster when doing the rebalancing so `add-brokers` would be needed.

## Motivation

With the help of the self-healing feature we can resolve the anomalies causing unhealthy/imbalanced cluster automatically.
The detection of anomalies is the responsibility of the anomaly detector mechanism.
Notifiers in Cruise Control are used to send notification to user about the self-healing operations being performed in the cluster.
Notifiers can be useful as they provide visibility to the user regarding the actions that are being performed by Cruise Control regarding self-healing for e.g. anomaly being detected, anomaly fix being started etc.
Currently, users are [able to set](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying.html#setting_up_alerts_for_anomaly_detection) the notifier to one of those included with Cruise Control (SelfHealingNotifier, AlertaSelfHealingNotifier, SlackSelfHealingNotifier etc).
However, any anomaly that is detected would then need to be fixed manually by using the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
It would be useful for users of Strimzi to be able to have these anomalies fixed automatically whenever they are detected.

## Proposal

### Introduction

> ![self-healing flow diagram](./images/090-self-healing-flow.png)

Reviewer: I would add a couple of sentences (at least) to explain what we are looking at in the diagram.
(I know the following sections are going into details for each of the boxes, more or less).

#### Anomaly Detector Manager

The anomaly detector manager helps in detecting the anomalies as well as handling them.
It acts as a coordinator between the detector classes as well as the classes which will be handling and resolving the anomalies.
Various detector classes like `GoalViolationDetector`, `DiskFailureDetector`, `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` etc. are used for the anomaly detection, which runs periodically to check if the cluster have their corresponding anomalies or not (The frequency of this check can be easily configured through the `anomaly.detection.interval.ms` configuration).
Detector classes have different mechanisms to detect their corresponding anomalies. For example, `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` utilises Kafka Metadata API whereas `DiskFailureDetector` and `TopicAnomalyDetector` utilises Kafka Admin API. Furthermore, `MetricAnomalyDetector` and `GoalViolationDetector` uses metrics to detect the anomalies.
The detected anomalies can be of various types:

> * Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured through the `self.healing.goals` configuration under the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section. These goals are independent of the manual rebalancing goals configured in the KafkaRebalance custom resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured through the `self.healing.goals` configuration under the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section. These goals are independent of the manual rebalancing goals configured in the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
```

If the action is `FIX`, then the anomaly detector manager calls the classes that are required to resolve the anomaly.

Anomaly detection also has various [configurations](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#anomalydetector-configurations), such as the detection interval and the anomaly notifier class, which can affect the performance of the Cruise Control server and the latency of the anomaly detection.

#### Notifiers in Cruise Control

Whenever anomalies are detected, Cruise Control provides the ability to notify the user regarding the detected anomalies using optional notifier classes.
The notification sent by these classes increases the visibility of the operations that are taken by Cruise Control.
However, the notifier class used by Cruise Control is configurable and custom notifiers can be used by setting the `anomaly.notifier.class` property.
The notifier class returns the `action` that is going to be taken on the flagged anomaly.
These actions can be classified into three types:
* FIX - Start the anomaly fix
* CHECK - Delay the anomaly fix
* IGNORE - Ignore the anomaly fix

> The default `NoopNotifer` always sets the notifier action as `IGNORE` means that the detected anomaly will be silently ignored.

Reviewer: I would also add that it doesn't send any notification to the user in any way as well.

Cruise Control also provides [custom notifiers](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configure-notifications) like Slack Notifier, Alerta Notifier etc. for notifying users regarding the anomalies. There are multiple other [self-healing notifier](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#selfhealingnotifier-configurations) related configurations you can use to make notifiers more efficient as per the use case.

#### Self Healing

If self-healing is enabled in Cruise Control and anomalies are detected, then a fix for these will be attempted automatically.
The action returned by the notifier would decide whether the anomaly should be fixed or not.
If the notifier has returned `FIX` as the action then the classes which are responsible for resolving the anomaly would be called.
Each detected anomaly is implemented by a specific class which leverages a corresponding other class to run a fix.
For example, the `GoalViolations` class uses the `RebalanceRunnable` class, the `DiskFailure` class use the `RemoveDisksRunnable` class and so on.

> An optimization proposal will then be generated by these `Runnable` classes and that proposal will be applied on the cluster to fix the anomaly.

Reviewer: Do we need this details about internal classes fixing the anomaly? Line from 68 to 70 are maybe not needed, wdyt @tomncooper ?

In case the anomaly detected is unfixable for e.g. violated hard goals that cannot be fixed typically due to lack of physical hardware(insufficient number of racks to satisfy rack awareness, insufficient number of brokers to satisfy Replica Capacity Goal, or insufficient number of resources to satisfy resource capacity goals), the anomaly wouldn't be fixed and the cruise control logs will be updated with `self-healing is not possible due to unfixable goals` warning.

> When self-healing starts, you can check the anomaly status by polling the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control) with `substate` parameter set as `anomaly_detector`. This would provide the anomaly details like anomalyId, the type of anomaly and the status of the anomaly etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When self-healing starts, you can check the anomaly status by querying the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control) with `substate` parameter set as `anomaly_detector`. This would provide the anomaly details like anomalyId, the type of anomaly and the status of the anomaly etc.
```

> For example, the user can poll the endpoint using the `curl` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the user can query the endpoint using the `curl` command:
```

```shell
curl -vv -X GET "http://localhost:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/state?substates=anomaly_detector"
```
the detected anomaly would look something like this:
```shell
#...
recentDiskFailures:[{anomalyId=4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, 
detectionDate=2024-12-09T09:49:46Z, 
statusUpdateDate=2024-12-09T09:49:47Z, 
failedDisksByTimeMs={2={/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2=1733737786603}}, 
status=FIX_STARTED}]}
```

> where the `anomalyID` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly, `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the broker id(which in this case is 2) as well the disk(/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2) which failed, `detectionDate` and `statusUpdateDate` represent the date and time when the anomaly was detected and the status of the anomaly was updated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where the `anomalyId` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly, `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the broker id(which in this case is 2) as well the disk(/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2) which failed, `detectionDate` and `statusUpdateDate` represent the date and time when the anomaly was detected and the status of the anomaly was updated.
```

Reviewer: I would have bullet points for them and not a long sentence.

The anomaly status would change based on how the healing progresses. The anomaly can transition to these possible status:
* DETECTED - The anomaly is just detected and no action is yet taken on it 
* IGNORED - Self healing is either disabled or the anomaly is unfixable
* FIX_STARTED - The anomaly fix has started
* FIX_FAILED_TO_START - The proposal generation for the anomaly fix failed 
* CHECK_WITH_DELAY - The anomaly fix is delayed 
* LOAD_MONITOR_NOT_READY - Monitor for workload of a Kafka cluster is in loading or bootstrap state
* COMPLETENESS_NOT_READY - Completeness not met for some goals. The completeness describes the confidence level of the data in the metric sample aggregator. If this is low then some Goal classes may refuse to produce proposals.

> We can again poll the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control), with `substate` parameter as `executor`, to get details on the tasks that are currently being performed by Cruise Control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can again query the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control), with `substate` parameter as `executor`, to get details on the tasks that are currently being performed by Cruise Control.
```

 Self healing for DISK_FAILURE: {
	Disk /var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2 on broker 2 failed at 2024-12-09T09:49:46Z
 }}
```
which gives more information about inter broker replica movements tasks which are: in-progress , pending, aborted, finished etc.

### Self-healing configuration in the Strimzi operator

Users can activate self-healing by setting the `self.healing.enabled` property to `true` and specifying a notifier that the self-healing mechanism is going to use in the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section of their `Kafka` resource.
If the user don't set the notifier property then `NoopNotifer` will be used by default which means all the action on the anomalies would be set to `IGNORE`.
Self-healing corresponding to broker failure or disk failure is disabled by default since we have better ways to fix these anomalies instead of moving the partition replicas across the brokers.
For example, brokers failures are generally due to lack of resources, so we can fix the issue at cluster level and in the same way failed disks can be easily replaced with a new one, so self-healing in these cases can be more resource consuming.

> Here is an example of how the configured Kafka custom resource could look:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how the configured `Kafka` custom resource could look:

```

These events would publish information regarding the anomaly like the anomalyID, the type of anomaly which was detected etc.
The events would help the user to understand the anomalies that are present, when the anomalies appeared in their cluster and also would help them know what is going on in their clusters.

The event published would look like this:
```yaml
- action: <action>
  apiVersion: v1
  eventTime: "2024-12-19T08:06:21.314140Z"
  firstTimestamp: null
  involvedObject:
    kind: Pod
    name: <cruise-control-pod-name>
    namespace: myproject
  kind: Event
  lastTimestamp: null
  message: Cruise Control is fixing the detected anomaly
  metadata:
    creationTimestamp: "2024-12-19T08:06:21Z"
    generateName: cruise-control-event
    name: my-cluster-34c41626-0add-47a3-9b79-d6ee29d5d81f  # my-cluster-<Anomaly ID>
    namespace: myproject
    resourceVersion: "101070"
    uid: 80892c7d-e3a1-44ad-84dc-2d88e15a7ff0
  reason: Anomaly was detected in the cluster GOAL_VIOLATION # Detected Anomaly type
  reportingComponent: cruise-control
  reportingInstance: cruise-control
  source: {}
  type: Normal
```

> The users can build a jar for the notifier for inclusion in the Kafka image to run on as part of Cruise Control.

Reviewer: The `KubernetesEventsNotifier` should be included out of the box within the Kafka Strimzi image in order to be configured by the operator. It's not clear if you are referring to a custom notifier that a user would write.

### Strimzi Operations while self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly 

> Self-healing is a very robust and resilient feature due to its ability to tackle issues while healing a cluster.

Reviewer: Not sure what's the purpose of this single sentence paragraph.

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and brokers are rolled

If some anomaly is getting healed , Cruise Control will then try to fix/mitigate the anomaly by moving the partition replicas across the brokers in the Kafka cluster.
If, during the process of moving partitions replicas among the brokers in the Kafka cluster, some broker that was being used gets deleted or rolled, then Cruise Control would finish self-healing process and log that `self-healing finished successful with error`.
If the deleted or rolled broker comes back before the periodic anomaly check interval, then self-healing would start again only for the earlier failed broker with a new anomalyId since it was not fixed properly. 
In case the deleted broker doesn't come back healthy within the periodic anomaly check interval then another new anomaly for the deleted broker will be created and the earlier detected failed broker would also persist but will be updated with a new anomalyId.

> #### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and Kafka Rebalance is approved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and KafkaRebalance is approved
```

If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is posted in the middle of it then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state, stating that there is already a rebalance ongoing. 
For example:
```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-08T08:24:01.314273452Z"
    message: 'Error for request: my-cluster-cruise-control.myproject.svc:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/rebalance?json=true&dryrun=false&verbose=true&skip_hard_goal_check=false&rebalance_disk=false.
      Server returned: Error processing POST request ''/rebalance'' due to: ''java.lang.IllegalStateException:
      Cannot start a new execution while there is an ongoing execution. Please use
      stop_ongoing_execution=true to stop ongoing execution and start a new one.''.'
    reason: CruiseControlRestException
    status: "True"
    type: NotReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-08T08:24:01.349653295Z"
    message: 'Wrong annotation value: approve. The rebalance resource supports the
      following annotations in NotReady state: [refresh]'
    reason: InvalidAnnotation
    status: "True"
    type: Warning
  observedGeneration: 1
```

> #### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and Kafka Rebalance is applied to ask for a proposal

Author: @ppatierno this section talks about what happens if we request rebalance in middle of self healing

If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is applied in the middle of it then Cruise Control will still generate an optimization proposal. The proposal should be based on the cluster shape at that particular timestamp.

## Affected/not affected projects

> A new repository named `kubernetes-event-notifier` will be added under the Strimzi organisation.

Reviewer: There is also the cluster operator to be affected because we need to allow enabling self-healing, or?

The detected anomalies can be of various types:
* Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured through the `self.healing.goals` configuration under the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section. These goals are independent of the manual rebalancing goals configured in the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
* Topic Anomaly - Can happen when one or more topics in cluster violates user-defined properties (e.g. some partitions are too large in disk).
* Broker Failure - It happens when a non-empty broker crashes or leaves a cluster.
* Disk Failure - This failure happens if one of the non-empty disks fails (related to a Kafka Cluster with JBOD disks).
* Metric anomaly - This failure happens if metrics collected by Cruise Control have some anomaly in their value (e.g. a sudden rise in the log flush time metrics).

> The detected anomalies are inserted into a priority queue and the anomaly with the highest property is picked first to resolve.

Reviewer: Each specify anomaly has a priority defined here [1].
The anomaly detector manager is putting anomalies into a `PriorityBlockingQueue` instance and the comparator for it is based on priority (lower comes first) and detection time (detected first comes first).

https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/blob/main/cruise-control/src/main/java/com/linkedin/kafka/cruisecontrol/detector/notifier/KafkaAnomalyType.java

However, the notifier class used by Cruise Control is configurable and custom notifiers can be used by setting the `anomaly.notifier.class` property.
The notifier class returns the `action` that is going to be taken on the flagged anomaly.
These actions can be classified into three types:
* FIX - Start the anomaly fix
* CHECK - Delay the anomaly fix
* IGNORE - Ignore the anomaly fix

The default `NoopNotifer` always sets the notifier action as `IGNORE` means that the detected anomaly will be silently ignored and no notification is sent to the user.

Cruise Control also provides [custom notifiers](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configure-notifications) like Slack Notifier, Alerta Notifier etc. for notifying users regarding the anomalies. There are multiple other [self-healing notifier](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#selfhealingnotifier-configurations) related configurations you can use to make notifiers more efficient as per the use case.

#### Self Healing

If self-healing is enabled in Cruise Control and anomalies are detected, then a fix for these will be attempted automatically.

> The action returned by the notifier would decide whether the anomaly should be fixed or not.

Reviewer: I agree it's not clear and should be clarified but the first sentence is part of the second one :-)
It's partially explained what I said here https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/145#discussion_r2073040198
Anyway, we need to make this more consistent and clear.

If the notifier has returned `FIX` as the action then the classes which are responsible for resolving the anomaly would be called.
Each detected anomaly is implemented by a specific class which leverages a corresponding other class to run a fix.
For example, the `GoalViolations` class uses the `RebalanceRunnable` class, the `DiskFailure` class use the `RemoveDisksRunnable` class and so on.
An optimization proposal will then be generated by these `Runnable` classes and that proposal will be applied on the cluster to fix the anomaly.

> In case the anomaly detected is unfixable for e.g. violated hard goals that cannot be fixed typically due to lack of physical hardware(insufficient number of racks to satisfy rack awareness, insufficient number of brokers to satisfy Replica Capacity Goal, or insufficient number of resources to satisfy resource capacity goals), the anomaly wouldn't be fixed and the cruise control logs will be updated with `self-healing is not possible due to unfixable goals` warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the anomaly detected is unfixable for e.g. violated hard goals that cannot be fixed typically due to lack of physical hardware (insufficient number of racks to satisfy rack awareness, insufficient number of brokers to satisfy Replica Capacity Goal, or insufficient number of resources to satisfy resource capacity goals), the anomaly wouldn't be fixed and the Cruise Control logs will be updated with `self-healing is not possible due to unfixable goals` warning.
```

When self-healing starts, you can check the anomaly status by querying the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control) with `substate` parameter set as `anomaly_detector`. This would provide the anomaly details like anomalyId, the type of anomaly and the status of the anomaly etc.

> For example, the user can query the endpoint using the `curl` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example, the user can query the endpoint using the `curl` command:

```

```shell
curl -vv -X GET "http://localhost:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/state?substates=anomaly_detector"
```

> the detected anomaly would look something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

the detected anomaly would look something like this:

```

```shell
#...
recentDiskFailures:[{anomalyId=4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, 
detectionDate=2024-12-09T09:49:46Z, 
statusUpdateDate=2024-12-09T09:49:47Z, 
failedDisksByTimeMs={2={/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2=1733737786603}}, 
status=FIX_STARTED}]}
```

> where, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where:
```

> * `anomalyId` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `anomalyId` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly.
```

> * `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the broker id(which in this case is 2) as well the disk(/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2) which failed, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the broker id (which in this case is 2) as well the disk (/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2) which failed. 
```

* `detectionDate` and `statusUpdateDate` represent the date and time when the anomaly was detected and the status of the anomaly was updated.

The anomaly status would change based on how the healing progresses. The anomaly can transition to these possible status:
* DETECTED - The anomaly is just detected and no action is yet taken on it 
* IGNORED - Self healing is either disabled or the anomaly is unfixable
* FIX_STARTED - The anomaly fix has started
* FIX_FAILED_TO_START - The proposal generation for the anomaly fix failed 
* CHECK_WITH_DELAY - The anomaly fix is delayed 
* LOAD_MONITOR_NOT_READY - Monitor for workload of a Kafka cluster is in loading or bootstrap state
* COMPLETENESS_NOT_READY - Completeness not met for some goals. The completeness describes the confidence level of the data in the metric sample aggregator. If this is low then some Goal classes may refuse to produce proposals.

We can again query the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control), with `substate` parameter as `executor`, to get details on the tasks that are currently being performed by Cruise Control.

> For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example:

```

```shell
ExecutorState: {state: INTER_BROKER_REPLICA_MOVEMENT_TASK_IN_PROGRESS,
 pending(20)/in-progress(0)/aborting(0)/finished(0)/total(20) inter-broker partition movements, 
 completed(0)/total(0) bytes in MBs: 0.00%, max/min/avg concurrent inter-broker partition movements per-broker: 5/5/5.00, 
 triggeredSelfHealingTaskId: 4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, triggeredTaskReason:
 Self healing for DISK_FAILURE: {
	Disk /var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2 on broker 2 failed at 2024-12-09T09:49:46Z
 }}
```

> where,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where:
```

> * `state` refers to the status of the replica movement(pending/in-progress/finished etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `state` refers to the status of the replica movement (pending/in-progress/finished etc.)
```

* `triggeredSelfHealingTaskId` points to the anomalyId
* `triggeredTaskReason` refers to the reason why self-healing was triggered

### Self-healing configuration in the Strimzi operator

Users can activate self-healing by setting the `self.healing.enabled` property to `true` and specifying a notifier that the self-healing mechanism is going to use in the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section of their `Kafka` resource.

> If the user don't set the notifier property then `NoopNotifer` will be used by default which means all the action on the anomalies would be set to `IGNORE`.

Reviewer: I would so make clear that the `self.healing.enabled` is not enough by itself then, because you also need to set a proper notifier (instead of the default `NoopNotifier`).

Author: But wouldn't that mean that we will then have to create another new notifier? Isn't just specifying enough or should or maybe a warning in the Kafka CR is enough?

Reviewer: I guess this discussion is clashing with the other one where we are thinking of setting the Kube events notifier as default, or?

Author: Yes, for now I have updated the proposal saying that if no notifier is specified then kube events notifier will be selected as default but i wonder if we should do that?  Shouldn't we just create a `warning/error` in Kafka CR saying that specifying the notifier is must or maybe setting the `SelfHealingNotifer` as Default so that self healing still works and also mentioning in the Kafka CR?

Reviewer: The `SelfHealingNotifer` has an implementation of the `alert` method which just log in the CC pod, which is of course not so Kube friendly or at least it means a user should take a look at log. I think in our Kube env, it would be better having something more "cloud-native friendly".

Self-healing corresponding to broker failure or disk failure is disabled by default since we have better ways to fix these anomalies instead of moving the partition replicas across the brokers.

> For example, brokers failures are generally due to lack of resources, so we can fix the issue at cluster level and in the same way failed disks can be easily replaced with a new one, so self-healing in these cases can be more resource consuming.

Reviewer: > Does this mean we are disabling the detection of these anomalies or just disabling the fixing of them?

Anomalies detection cannot be disabled. The anomaly detector manager just starts together with several tasks to detect anomalies. What can be enabled/disabled is the fix or not and it depends on the notifier logic.
I think what Shubhma is saying here is that we are going to disable the self-healing for brokers failures by default, giving anyway the chance to the user to enable it. When self-healing for brokers failures is disabled, the base notifier class (see my comment here https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/145#discussion_r2073040198) will ignore it by default.

> Will users get notifications/metrics showing anomalies that won't be fixed?

We can have the notification anyway in our one Kube events notifier but if the users use their own notifier it will depend on their logic.

> Here is an example of how the configured `Kafka` custom resource could look:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of how the configured `Kafka` custom resource could look:

```

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    config:
      # configuration to enable self-healing for all anomalies
      self.healing.enabled: true
      anomaly.notifer.class: <notifier-class> # can be set to `SelfHealingNotifier, SlackSelfHealingNotifier, AlertaSelfHealingNotifier etc. or you own custom notifier
      self.healing.broker.failure.enabled: false # disables self healing for broker failure
      self.healing.disk.failure.enabled: false # disables self healing for disk failure
```

> The user can still enable self-healing for disk failures and broker failure if they want by setting the  `self.healing.broker.failure.enabled` for broker failure and `self.healing.disk.failure.enabled` for disk failure to `true`.

Reviewer: These are CC configs and yes I think the idea is to set them to false by default.

In the same way user can enable and disable the self-healing for other anomalies.

### Using metrics when using self-healing

Cruise control provides [self-healing related metrics](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Sensors#anomalydetector-sensors) which can help them understand what kind of anomalies were detected in their cluster, when self-healing started, the rate at which the anomalies are being detected in their cluster and much more.
These metrics can also provide a way to the users to debug self-healing related issues.
For example, the `number_of_self_healing_started` metric can provides users, the way to check when self-healing was started for an anomaly, and the number of self-healing actions that were performed in the cluster. 
This information can be useful to at what point of time the self-healing occured and the shape/replica assignment of the cluster was changed due to self-healing.

> The user can also use the  metric like `number_of_self_healing_failed` to know if the self-healing failed to start to understand, and then they can check the reasons in the log for the failure. One example could be load monitor was ready at that point of time.

Reviewer: AFAIU all the above metrics are historical ones but they don't give any information about what's going on now.
I made this comment on the CC related PR as well, so I was wondering if we need to expose metrics about self-healing actually running.

Author: I don't see any exsisting metrics like that yet in CC. There are metrics which can tell that there are inter/intra broker replica movement but Iam not sure how we can expose a metric to say when self healing is running. After talking with Tom there was a way we can know if self healing still running. we can have the sum(self healing started) minus sum(self healing ended) that can tell if the self healing is still in progress

Reviewer: But then it's something we should explain in the proposals and maybe providing a Grafana dashboard with such information?
Do we have, at least, the metric about when the last fix started?

Author: If you are asking about the existing metrics then you can still use the `number_of_self_healing_started` metric and use the promql query to get the timestamp for the last change in the gauge -> `last_over_time(timestamp(changes(kafka_cruisecontrol_anomalydetector_num_of_self_healing_started_for_broker_failure_count{}[<time-range>]) > 0`

Author: If we want it based on the anomaly, we can do the same with the new metrics `num_of_self_healing_started_for_<anomaly-type>_count`

Reviewer: Ok so I think we should listing this info in the proposal.

Author: Sure

Author: Currently we just have single metrics called `number_of_self_healing_started` to know that self healing was started for fixing an anomaly(these metrics doesn't classify anomaly on types) and there is no metrics regarding when self healing ended. The [PR](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/pull/2268) opened on CC upstream introduces new metrics regarding -> `num-of-self-healing-started-for-<anomalyType>` and ``num-of-self-healing-ended-for-<anomalyType>` which are both classified based on the anomaly types. But at the same time it doesn't add any metrics like `number_of_self_healing_ended` for self healing ended which can provide us an overall count of how many self healing ended.

#### KubernetesEventsNotifier 

Cruise Control provides `AnomalyNotifier` interface which has multiple abstract methods on what to do if certain anomalies are detected.
`SelfHealingNotifier` is the base class that contains the logic of self-healing and override the methods in by implementing the `AnomalyNotifier` interface.
Some of those methods are:`onGoalViolation()`, `onBrokerFailure()`, `onDiskFailure`, `alert()` etc.
The `KubernetesEventsNotifier` is based of the `SelfHealingNotifier` class.
For effective alerts and monitoring, it makes use of Kubernetes events to signal to users what operations Cruise Control is performing automatically.
The `KubernetesEventsNotifier` will override the `alert()` method of the `SelfHealingNotifier` and will trigger and publish events whenever an anomaly is detected.
These events would publish information regarding the anomaly like the anomalyID, the type of anomaly which was detected etc.

> The events would help the user to understand the anomalies that are present, when the anomalies appeared in their cluster and also would help them know what is going on in their clusters.

Reviewer: > So my main question here is: Will this KubernetesEventNotifier be auto-approving all notification?

I think the answer to this is still in my comment here https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/145#discussion_r2073040198 to explain how the base class for notifier works unless we want to write something from scratch (but I would argue about this).

When an anomaly is detected, Cruise Control may try to fix/mitigate it by moving the partition replicas across the brokers in the Kafka cluster.
If, during the process of moving partitions replicas among the brokers in the Kafka cluster, some broker that was being used gets deleted or rolled, then Cruise Control would finish self-healing process and log that `self-healing finished successful with error`.
If the deleted or rolled broker comes back before the periodic anomaly check interval, then self-healing would start again only for the earlier failed broker with a new anomalyId since it was not fixed properly. 
In case the deleted broker doesn't come back healthy within the periodic anomaly check interval then another new anomaly for the deleted broker will be created and the earlier detected failed broker would also persist but will be updated with a new anomalyId.

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and KafkaRebalance is approved

If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is posted in the middle of it then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state, stating that there is already a rebalance ongoing. 

> For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example:

```

```yaml
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-08T08:24:01.314273452Z"
    message: 'Error for request: my-cluster-cruise-control.myproject.svc:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/rebalance?json=true&dryrun=false&verbose=true&skip_hard_goal_check=false&rebalance_disk=false.
      Server returned: Error processing POST request ''/rebalance'' due to: ''java.lang.IllegalStateException:
      Cannot start a new execution while there is an ongoing execution. Please use
      stop_ongoing_execution=true to stop ongoing execution and start a new one.''.'
    reason: CruiseControlRestException
    status: "True"
    type: NotReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-08T08:24:01.349653295Z"
    message: 'Wrong annotation value: approve. The rebalance resource supports the
      following annotations in NotReady state: [refresh]'
    reason: InvalidAnnotation
    status: "True"
    type: Warning
  observedGeneration: 1
```

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and Kafka Rebalance is applied to ask for a proposal

> If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is applied in the middle of it then Cruise Control will still generate an optimization proposal. The proposal should be based on the cluster shape at that particular timestamp.

Reviewer: How does this sentence cope with the previous one where you say the `KafkaRebalance` ends in a `NotReady` state. I am confused. Will it be not ready or will it have a proposal?

With smaller clusters, it is feasible to fix things manually. However, for larger ones it can be very time-consuming, or just not feasible, to fix all the issue on your own.

## Motivation

With the help of the self-healing feature we can resolve the issues like disk failure, broker failure and other issues automatically.
Cruise Control treats these issues as "anomalies", the detection of which is the responsibility of the anomaly detector mechanism.
Currently, users are [able to set]((https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying.html#setting_up_alerts_for_anomaly_detection)) the notifier to one of those included with Cruise Control (<list of included notifiers>).
However, any anomaly that is detected would then need to be fixed manually by using the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
It would be useful for users of Strimzi to be able to have these anomalies fixed automatically whenever they are detected.

## Proposal

### Introduction

![self-healing flow diagram](./images/090-self-healing-flow.png)

#### Anomaly Detector Manager

> The anomaly detector manager helps in detecting the anomalies and also handling the detected anomalies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The anomaly detector manager helps in detecting the anomalies as well as handling them.
```

It acts as a coordinator between the detector classes as well as the classes which will be handling and resolving the anomalies.
Various detector classes like `GoalViolationDetector`, `DiskFailureDetector`, `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` etc. are used for the anomaly detection, which runs periodically to check if the cluster have their corresponding anomalies or not (This periodic check can be easily configured through the `anomaly.detection.interval.ms` configuration).
Every detector class works in a different way to detect their corresponding anomalies. A `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` will require a deep usage of requesting metadata to the Kafka cluster (i.e. broker failure) while if we talk about `DiskFailureDetector` it will be more inclined towards using the admin client API. In the same way the `MetricAnomalyDetector` will be making use of metrics and other detector like `GoalViolationDetector` and `TopicAnomalyDetector` will have their own way to detect anomalies.
The detected anomalies can be of various types:

> * Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured independently (through the `self.healing.goals` config) to those used for manual rebalancing..

Author: if you have specified hard goals in the KR, then the `self.healing.goals` should be a superset of the `hard goals`.

* Topic Anomaly - Can happen when one or more topics in cluster violates user-defined properties (e.g. some partitions are too large in disk).
* Broker Failure - It happens when a non-empty broker crashes or leaves a cluster.
* Disk Failure - This failure happens if one of the non-empty disks fails (related to a Kafka Cluster with JBOD disks).
* Metric anomaly - This failure happens if metrics collected by Cruise Control have some anomaly in their value (e.g. a sudden rise in the log flush time metrics).

The detected anomalies are inserted into a priority queue and the anomaly with the highest property is picked first to resolve.
The anomaly detector manager calls the notifier to get an action regarding, whether the anomaly should be fixed, delayed or ignored.
If the action is fix, then the anomaly detector manager calls the classes that are required to resolve the anomaly.

> Anomaly detection also has several other [configurations](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#anomalydetector-configurations), such as the detection interval and the anomaly notifier class, which can effect the performance of the Cruise Control server and the latency of the anomaly detection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anomaly detection also has various [configurations](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#anomalydetector-configurations), such as the detection interval and the anomaly notifier class, which can affect the performance of the Cruise Control server and the latency of the anomaly detection.
```

#### Notifiers in Cruise Control

Whenever anomalies are detected, Cruise Control provides the ability to notify the user regarding the detected anomalies using optional notifier classes.
The notification sent by these classes increases the visibility of the operation that are taken by Cruise Control.
However, the notifier class used by Cruise Control is configurable and custom notifiers can be used by setting the `anomaly.notifier.class` property.
The notifier class returns the `action` that is going to be taken on the notified anomaly.
These actions can be classified into three types:
* FIX - Start the anomaly fix

> * CHECK - Delay the anomaly fix

Reviewer 2: does the delay action, apply a configured delay before taking the action provided by notifier?

Reviewer: Yes. Even if the delay is mostly used only for broker failures and not for another anomalies AFAIK.

* IGNORE - Ignore the anomaly fix

The default `NoopNotifer` always sets the notifier action as `IGNORE` means that the detected anomaly will be silently ignored.

> Cruise Control also provides [custom notifiers](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configure-notifications) like Slack Notifier, Alerta Notifier etc. for notifying users regarding the anomalies. There are multiple other [self-healing notifier](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#selfhealingnotifier-configurations) related configurations you can use to make notifiers more efficient as per the use case.

Reviewer: I can't see Prometheus mentioned earlier. Also AFAICS Cruise Control provides some notifiers like Slack, Alerta, MS Teams but there is not Prometheus one. It would be on you developing your own Prometheus notifier.

#### Self Healing

> If self-healing is enabled in Cruise Control and anomalies are detected, then a fix for these will be attempted automatically.

Reviewer 2: A fix will be attempted automatically only if `anomaly.notifier.class` is configured to non default notifier right? So enabling self-healing alone is  not enough, as with the default notifier (NoopNotifer), anomalies are detected but ignored?

Author: Yes, you will need to override the `notifier` too

The action returned by the notifier would decide whether the anomaly should be fixed or not.
If the notifier has returned `FIX` as the action then the classes which are responsible for resolving the anomaly would be called.
Each detected anomaly is implemented by a specific class which leverages a corresponding other class to run a fix.

> For example, the `BrokerFailures` class uses the `RemoveBrokersRunnable` class, the `DiskFailure` class use the `RemoveDisksRunnable` class and so on.

Reviewer: Of course, Cruise Control is all about rebalancing nothing more. It can't remove a disk and replace with a new one. So for a disk failure it will move partitions off that disk to the others, same for a broker failure, same for a goal violation ... moving partitions around. We can call it mitigation if it's not a proper "fix" but this is the naming within Cruise Control.

An optimization proposal will then be generated by these `Runnable` classes and that proposal will be applied on the cluster to fix the anomaly.
In case the anomaly detected is unfixable for e.g. violated hard goals that cannot be fixed typically due to lack of physical hardware(insufficient number of racks to satisfy rack awareness, insufficient number of brokers to satisfy Replica Capacity Goal, or insufficient number of resources to satisfy resource capacity goals), the anomaly wouldn't be fixed and the cruise control logs will be updated with `self-healing is not possible due to unfixable goals` warning.

> When self-healing starts, you can check the anomaly status by polling the `state` endpoint with the `substate` configured as `anomaly_detector`. This would provide the anomaly details like `anomalyId`, `anomalyType` and the status of the anomaly etc.

Reviewer: I would be more to specify the exact API endpoint you are going to call (with also a reference to the doc) instead of describing it as "the `state` endpoint with the `substate` configured as `anomaly_detector`"

For example, the detected anomaly would look like this:
```shell
#...
recentDiskFailures:[{anomalyId=4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, 
detectionDate=2024-12-09T09:49:46Z, 
statusUpdateDate=2024-12-09T09:49:47Z, 
failedDisksByTimeMs={2={/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2=1733737786603}}, 

> status=FIX_STARTED}]}

Reviewer: I would describe more what the above snippet represents.

```

The anomaly status would change based on how the healing progresses. The anomaly can transition to these possible status:
* DETECTED - The anomaly is just detected and no action is yet taken on it 
* IGNORED - Self healing is either disabled or the anomaly is unfixable

> * FIX_STARTED - The anomaly has started getting fixed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* FIX_STARTED - A fix for a detected anomaly is in progress
```

* FIX_FAILED_TO_START - The proposal generation for the anomaly fix failed 
* CHECK_WITH_DELAY - The anomaly fix is delayed 

> * LOAD_MONITOR_NOT_READY - Monitor which is monitoring the workload of a Kafka cluster is in loading or bootstrap state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* LOAD_MONITOR_NOT_READY - Monitor for workload of a Kafka cluster is in loading or bootstrap state
```

* COMPLETENESS_NOT_READY - Completeness not met for some goals. The completeness describes the confidence level of the data in the metric sample aggregator. If this is low then some Goal classes may refuse to produce proposals.

We can also poll the `state` endpoint, with `substate` parameter as `executor`, to get details on the tasks that are currently being performed by Cruise Control.
For example:
```shell
ExecutorState: {state: INTER_BROKER_REPLICA_MOVEMENT_TASK_IN_PROGRESS,
 pending(20)/in-progress(0)/aborting(0)/finished(0)/total(20) inter-broker partition movements, 
 completed(0)/total(0) bytes in MBs: 0.00%, max/min/avg concurrent inter-broker partition movements per-broker: 5/5/5.00, 
 triggeredSelfHealingTaskId: 4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, triggeredTaskReason:
 Self healing for DISK_FAILURE: {
	Disk /var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2 on broker 2 failed at 2024-12-09T09:49:46Z

>  }}

Reviewer: I would describe more what the above snippet represents.

Reviewer: @ShubhamRwt I can't see this comment being addressed, or?

Author: I did add a line about it but not went into complete explanation. I will do that

```

### Enabling self-healing configuration in the Strimzi operator

Every configuration related to self-healing is currently disabled in the operator, and we will need to enable users altering some of those properties.
The setting of these properties will be placed behind a feature gate.

### Feature Gate

The new feature gate will be called `UseSelfHealing`.
It will be introduced in an alpha state and will be disabled by default.

We are using a feature gate for this feature due to various reasons:
* We want to allow users to try this feature and test it.
* We would like to know more about the positive/negatives of this feature by testing it in real deployments.

> * Getting feedback from the community would allow us to understand how we can improve this even more.

Reviewer 3: How exactly will the feature gate be used to achieve this?

### Enabling self-healing in the Kafka custom resource

When the feature gate is enabled, the operator will set the `self.healing.enabled` Cruise Control configuration to `true` and allow the users to set other appropriate `self-healing` related [configurations](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#selfhealingnotifier-configurations).

Here is an example of how the configured Kafka custom resource could look:
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    config:
      # configuration to enable self-healing for all anomalies
      self.healing.enabled: true

> ```

Reviewer 3: These two things seem to contradict each other ...
* Does the `UseSelfHealing` FG enable the self-healing as sugested in the first paragraph?
* Or does it allow the user to enable self-healing as suggested by the example YAML?

Author: I would say the first one. FG enables the self healing. I will remove this

Reviewer 3: That would mean you would force the self-healing one day on all users even if they don't want it. That does not seem to be the right way, or?

Reviewer 2: I also find FG and this configuration a bit confusing. If FG is not enabled, would this configuration be allowed by user? What would happen, if user sets this configuration without enabling FG?

Reviewer: My take on this is that the user should enable self healing (and all the corresponding properties/configuration) which would be anyway ignored if the FG is not enabled. This way we are putting the "enablement and configuration of self-healing" behind a FG.

> Where the user wants to enable self-healing for some specific anomalies, they can use configurations like `self.healing.broker.failure.enabled` for broker failure, `self.healing.goal.violation.enabled` for goal violation etc.

Reviewer 2: Is there any anomalies enabled by default? If user does not specify anomalies to detect, self-healing will do nothing?

Author: If the user doesn't specify any specific anomalies(i.e you used just `self.healing.enabled: true`) then self healing would be detecting all the anomalies. In case the user knows that somehow any anomaly will keep appearing since they have some issues in their cluster, then in that they can use the above property to enable self healing for only specific anomaly and skip the check for the other anomaly

### Strimzi Notifier

Cruise Control provides `AnomalyNotifier` interface which has multiple abstract methods on what to do if certain anomalies are detected.
`SelfHealingNotifier` is the base class that contains the logic of self-healing and override the methods in by implementing the `AnomalyNotifier` interface. 
Some of those methods are:`onGoalViolation()`, `onBrokerFailure()`, `onDisk Failure`, `alert()` etc.

> The `SelfHealingNotifier` class can then be further used to implement your own notifier

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SelfHealingNotifier` class can then be further used to implement your own notifier.
```

The other custom notifier offered by Cruise control are also based upon the `SelfHealingNotifier`.

We will be using our own notifier implementation called `StrimziNotifer`(set via the `anomaly.notifier.class` config).
Strimzi will configure Cruise Control to always use the `StrimziNotifier` to notify regarding the anomalies and take action on them.

> For effective alerts and monitoring, we will be making use of Kubernetes events to signal to users what operations Cruise Control is performing automatically.

Reviewer 3: * Why do you think Kubernetes Events are a good way to communicate the anomalies?
* Why should it be forced on the user? 
* Why should it be called `StrimziNotifier`? It seems to be more Strimzi `KubernetesEventsNotifier` as it has nothing really specific to Strimzi?

Reviewer: IIRC (during an offline discussion) we went towards the Kube events as a better solution to make users aware (at least) that an anomaly was detected instead of using, for example, a specific custom resource (i.e. `KafkaAnomaly`) or some other Kube built-in resource. How would you make the user aware of detected anomalies? Just logs? AFAIK you should be able to gather Kube events in a Grafana dashboard for monitoring as well.

On the naming side, maybe yes, a more generic `KubernetesEventsNotifier` is better.

The `StrimziNotifier` will override the `alert()` method of the `SelfHealingNotifier` and will trigger and publish events whenever an anomaly is detected.

> These events would publish information regarding the anomaly like the anomalyID, the type of anomaly which was detected etc.

Reviewer 3: How is something like the `anomalyID` useful to the user? We do not support the CC UI, so is there some simple way for the users to find more details about this anomaly based on the `anomalyID`?

Author: Users can get more information using the `state` endpoint with `executor` substate. The `executor` will show the progress for the anomaly getting resolved(It will also contains the id of anomaly being resolved). they can also use the `state` endpoint with `anomaly_detector` substate to know more about what type of anomaly is detected , when it was detected etc

Reviewer 3: So you expect them to `curl` it?

Author: Yes, thats the only way for now to check what Cruise Control is doing during self healing

Reviewer 3: That sounds quite complicated. Do you expect the user would need to do this? Or would they be in 99% of cases be happy with what is in the event itself? The example event does not seem to have muhc detail about the problem that was detected.

Reviewer: I guess we can get more information about the anomaly from the notifier.
We cannot get info about the fix because, as per how CC works today, there is no more interaction with the notifier from the anomaly detector after the anomaly fix starts. The notifier has just one goal: to notify and decide for the anomaly detector to fix, delay, ignore the anomaly. Nothing more. It's not called anymore in any way along the process.
Still per our offline discussion, the refused `KafkaAnomaly` custom resource was there to provide a way for the operator to get the anomaly and querying the CC endpoints in order to update such resource with the anomaly fix status in progress.

The events would help the user to understand the anomalies that are present, when the anomalies appeared in their cluster and also would help them know what is going on in their clusters.

The event published would look like this:
```yaml
- action: <action>
  apiVersion: v1
  eventTime: "2024-12-19T08:06:21.314140Z"
  firstTimestamp: null
  involvedObject:
    kind: Pod
    name: <cruise-control-pod-name>
    namespace: myproject
  kind: Event
  lastTimestamp: null
  message: Cruise Control is fixing the detected anomaly
  metadata:
    creationTimestamp: "2024-12-19T08:06:21Z"
    generateName: cruise-control-event
    name: my-cluster-34c41626-0add-47a3-9b79-d6ee29d5d81f  # my-cluster-<Anomaly ID>
    namespace: myproject
    resourceVersion: "101070"
    uid: 80892c7d-e3a1-44ad-84dc-2d88e15a7ff0
  reason: Anomaly was detected in the cluster GOAL_VIOLATION # Detected Anomaly type
  reportingComponent: cruise-control
  reportingInstance: cruise-control
  source: {}
  type: Normal
```

> The `StrimziNotifier` class is going to reside in a separate module in the operator repository called the `strimzi-cruise-control-notifier` so that a seperate jar for the notifier can be built for inclusion in the Cruise Control container image.

Reviewer 3: * Why should it be in the operators repo? Seems like it has nothing to do with the operator? So Why not a separate repository?
* There is no Cruise Control container image, Cruise Control is in the Kafka images.

> We will also need to include the fabric8 client dependencies in the notifier JAR that will be used for generating the Kubernetes events as well as for reading the annotation on the Kafka resource from the notifier.

Reviewer 3: Reading what annotation?

Reviewer: Yeah, I think you are anticipating what's going to be in the next paragraph but this sentence doesn't make any sense here.

### Pausing the self-healing feature

The user should also have the option to pause the self-healing feature, in case they know or plan to do some rolling restart of the cluster or some rebalance they are going to perform which can cause issue with the self-healing itself.

> For this, we will be having an annotation called `strimzi.io/self-healing-paused`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this, we will be having an annotation called `strimzi.io/self-healing-paused` on the `Kafka` custom resource.
```

We can set this annotation on the Kafka custom resource to pause the self-healing feature.
self-healing is not paused by default so missing annotation would mean that anomalies detected will keep getting healed automatically.
When self-healing is paused, it would mean that all the anomalies that are detected after the pause annotation is applied would be ignored and no fix would be done for them.

> The anomalies that were already getting fixed would continue with the fix.

Reviewer 3: Why is pausing the self-healing useful for the users? Assuming it is useful, why not just disable the self-healing?

Reviewer: Disabling self-healing would mean restarting CC. Pausing mean that the notifier just returns "ignore" to the anomaly detector (but you could still see anomalies logged in the CC pod for example).

#### How the pausing works?

To pause self-healing, you will need to annotate the Kafka custom resource with the following annotation:

```sh
kubectl annotate kafka my-cluster `strimzi.io/self-healing-paused: "true"`
```

The Kafka custom resource will look like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  annotations:
     strimzi.io/self-healing-paused: "true"
  creationTimestamp: "2024-12-17T09:01:10Z"
  generation: 1
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: myproject
  resourceVersion: "109971"
  uid: 71928731-df71-4b9f-ac77-68961ac25a2f
```

> We will have checks on methods like `onGoalViolation`, `onBrokerFailure`, `onTopicAnomaly` etc. in the `StrimziNotifier` to check if the `pause` annotation is applied on the Kafka custom resource or not.

Reviewer: there is no `pause` annotation. Use the exact name.

If the annotation is applied then this check will set the `action` to be taken on the anomaly as `IGNORE` and the anomalies wouldn't be fixed.

### Strimzi Operations while self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly 

> Self-healing is a very robust and resilient feature due to its ability to tackle issues which can appear while the healing of cluster is happening.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Self-healing is a very robust and resilient feature due to its ability to tackle issues while healing a cluster.
```

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and brokers are rolled

> If a broker fails, self-healing will trigger and Cruise Control will try to move the partition replicas from the failed broker to other healthy brokers in the Kafka cluster.

Reviewer 3: What exactly does it mean when the `broker fails`? How does CC recognize it? How does it distinguish failure for example from some temporary Kubernetes scheduling issue?

Reviewer: The broker anomaly detector uses deep metadata request to the Kafka cluster to know the brokers status. The broker failure in particular is not fixed straight away but it's first delayed in order to double check "later" if the broker is still offline or not. All the timing between double checks are configurable. So any temporary issue will not be reported as anomaly and tried to be fixed.

> If, during the process of moving partitions from the failed broker, another broker in the Kafka cluster gets deleted or rolled, then Cruise Control would finish the transfer from the failed broker but log that `self-healing finished successful with error`.

Reviewer 3: How would it `finish the transfer from the failed broker` when the target broker is stopped? You mean that it will continue with it after the target broker is rolled?

Author: Yes, If the target broker is rolling at that moment, then self healing would end saying `self-healing finished successful with error`. Then periodic anomaly check will again detect the `failed broker ` and try to fix it. If the `target` broker is rolled by that time then self healing will start again else if the rolled broker is not up then we will will get two anomalies to fix `the failed broker` and the `target broker`

If the deleted or rolled broker comes back before the periodic anomaly check interval, then self-healing would start again only for the earlier failed broker with a new anomalyId since it was not fixed properly. 
In case the deleted broker doesn't come back healthy within the periodic anomaly check interval then another new anomaly for the deleted broker will be created and the earlier detected failed broker would also persist but will be updated with a new anomalyId.

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and Kafka Rebalance is applied

> If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is posted in the middle of it then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state, stating that there is already a rebalance ongoing. 

Reviewer 3: Does this need to differenciate between asking for proposal and approving a proposal? For example when asking for proposal, I would expect the operator to wait and give me a proposal after the self-healing ends.

Reviewer: From the following snippet I can see the `dryrun=false` so this seems a condition happening when you approve a proposal. @ShubhamRwt does it mean that during self-healing, CC was able to return to you a proposal and you were able to approve it and then getting the error?

Reviewer: @ShubhamRwt any answer here?

Author: I pushed a section around this in the proposal

Currently, if we encounter any such scenario we need to fix these issues manually i.e. if there is some goal violation and the cluster is imbalanced then we might instruct Cruise Control to move the partition replicas across the brokers in order to fix the violated goal by using the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
With smaller clusters, it is feasible to fix things manually. However, for larger ones it can be very time-consuming, or just not feasible, to fix all the anomalies on your own.

## Motivation

With the help of Cruise Control's self-healing feature we can resolve the anomalies causing unhealthy/imbalanced cluster automatically.
The detection of anomalies is the responsibility of the anomaly detector mechanism.
Notifiers in Cruise Control are used to send notification to user about the self-healing operations being performed in the cluster.
Notifiers can be useful as they provide visibility to the user regarding the actions that are being performed by Cruise Control regarding self-healing for e.g. anomaly being detected, anomaly fix being started etc.

> Currently, users are [able to set](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying.html#setting_up_alerts_for_anomaly_detection) the notifier to one of those included with Cruise Control (SelfHealingNotifier, AlertaSelfHealingNotifier, SlackSelfHealingNotifier etc.).

Reviewer 4: Wouldn't the information concerning the notifier feature be more relevant in the proposal section instead of the motivation section here where we describe the motivation behind why we want to add self-healing support? Unless we are adding support for Cruise Control notifiers as part of this proposal as well?

Two questions here:

(a) Can we use the Cruise Control notifiers feature on its own in Strimzi today without adding self-healing support?

(b) I understand that we need Cruise Control's notifier feature for supporting the self-healing feature, but wouldn't the sentences about the notifier feature be more relevant in the proposal's implementations section instead of here?

However, self-healing is currently disabled and disallowed in Strimzi. 

> The `self-healing` properties were disabled since there was investigation missing around how self-healing would act if pods roll in middle of it/rebalance starts in  or how the operator would know if self-healing is running or not 

Reviewer 4: I would move a variation of this sentence up to the `Current Situation` section.

Any anomaly that the user is notified about would need to be fixed manually by using the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.

> It would be useful for users of Strimzi to be able to have these anomalies fixed automatically whenever they are detected.

Reviewer 4: Why is it useful to have these anomalies fixed automatically? It might be worth describing some of the anomalies the self-healing could fix automatically and why they are such a hassle to fix manually.

Furthermore, `MetricAnomalyDetector` and `GoalViolationDetector` use metrics to detect their anomalies.
The detected anomalies can be of various types:
* Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured through the `self.healing.goals` configuration under the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section. These goals are independent of the manual rebalancing goals configured in the `KafkaRebalance` custom resource.
* Topic Anomaly - Where one or more topics in cluster violates user-defined properties (e.g. some partitions are too large in disk).
* Broker Failure - This happens when a non-empty broker crashes or leaves a cluster.
* Disk Failure - This failure happens if one of the non-empty disks fails (related to a Kafka Cluster with JBOD disks).
* Metric anomaly - This failure happens if metrics collected by Cruise Control have some anomaly in their value (e.g. a sudden rise in the log flush time metrics).

The detected anomalies are inserted into a priority queue where comparator is based upon the priority value and the detection time. 

> The smaller the priority value and detected time is, the higher priority the anomaly type has.

Author: The priority is set in the `KafkaAnomalyType` class in Cruise Control. 
```
  @JsonResponseField
  BROKER_FAILURE(0),
  @JsonResponseField
  MAINTENANCE_EVENT(1),
  @JsonResponseField
  DISK_FAILURE(2),
  @JsonResponseField
  METRIC_ANOMALY(3),
  @JsonResponseField
  GOAL_VIOLATION(4),
  @JsonResponseField
  TOPIC_ANOMALY(5);
```
where the anomaly with lowest no. has highest priority. Based on the detection time, the anomaly which is detected first would be resolved first

The anomaly detector manager calls the notifier to get an action regarding whether the anomaly should be fixed, delayed, or ignored.
If the action is `FIX`, then the anomaly detector manager calls the classes that are required to resolve the anomaly.

Anomaly detection also has various [configurations](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#anomalydetector-configurations), such as the detection interval and the anomaly notifier class, which can affect the performance of the Cruise Control server and the latency of the anomaly detection.

#### Notifiers in Cruise Control

Whenever anomalies are detected, Cruise Control provides the ability to notify the user regarding the detected anomalies using optional notifier classes.
The notification sent by these classes increases the visibility of the operations that are taken by Cruise Control.

> The notifier class used by Cruise Control is configurable and custom notifiers can be used by setting the `anomaly.notifier.class` property.

Author: Yes

These actions have three types:
* FIX - Start the anomaly fix
* CHECK - Delay the anomaly fix
* IGNORE - Ignore the anomaly fix

The default `NoopNotifer` always sets the notifier action as `IGNORE`, which  means that the detected anomaly will be silently ignored and no notification is sent to the user.

Cruise Control also provides [custom notifiers](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configure-notifications) like Slack Notifier, Alerta Notifier etc. for notifying users regarding the anomalies. There are multiple other [self-healing notifier](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Configurations#selfhealingnotifier-configurations) related configurations you can use to make notifiers more efficient as per the use case.

#### Self Healing

If self-healing is enabled, then an action is returned by the notifier to would decide whether the anomaly should be fixed or not.
If the notifier has returned `FIX` as the action then the classes which are responsible for resolving the anomaly would be called.
Each detectable anomaly is handled by a specific detector class which then uses another remediation class to run a fix.

> For example, the `GoalViolations` class uses the `RebalanceRunnable` class, the `DiskFailure` class use the `RemoveDisksRunnable` class and so on.

Author: Iam not sure if we can do that. I just we can create custom goals in CC but I don't know if we can write custom runnables. I can ask some CC folks if its possible or not

This will provide the anomaly details such as its ID number, the type of anomaly and the status of the anomaly etc.

For example, the user can query the endpoint using the `curl` command:

```shell
curl -vv -X GET "http://localhost:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/state?substates=anomaly_detector"
```

the detected anomaly would look something like this:

```shell
#...
recentDiskFailures:[{anomalyId=4b1ed191-50d7-4aa1-806b-b8c5c0d679fe, 
detectionDate=2024-12-09T09:49:46Z, 
statusUpdateDate=2024-12-09T09:49:47Z, 
failedDisksByTimeMs={2={/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2=1733737786603}}, 
status=FIX_STARTED}]}
```

where: 
* `anomalyId` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly.
* `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the broker id(which in this case is 2) as well the disk(/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2) which failed.
* `detectionDate` and `statusUpdateDate` represent the date and time when the anomaly was detected and the status of the anomaly was updated.

The anomaly status changes based on how the healing is progressing.
The anomaly can transition to these possible states:
* DETECTED - The anomaly is just detected and no action is yet taken on it 

> * IGNORED - Self healing is either disabled or the anomaly is unfixable

Author: yes, let me add it

Cruise Control also have [metrics](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Sensors#executor-sensors) for tracking the inter/intra broker replica movement and also the ongoing replica movement rate/concurrency which can be useful to know if all the replicas movement was successful or if there were some replica movement which didn't complete.
[Work](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/pull/2268) is currently ongoing in the upstream Cruise Control project to have some metrics which can give us the self-healing start and end timestamp based upon the type of anomaly.
To enable the metrics, the user can follow the Strimzi documentation on how we [expose the metrics](https://strimzi.io/docs/operators/latest/full/deploying.html#assembly-metrics-setup-str) through an HTTP endpoint.

### Proposal for enabling self-healing in Strimzi

In order to activate self-healing, users will need to set the `self.healing.enabled` property to `true` and specifying a notifier that the self-healing mechanism is going to use in the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section of their `Kafka` resource.

> If the user forgets to set the notifier property then the `KubernetesEventNotifier`(custom notifier under Strimzi org) will be used by default and the user will also get a warning in the Kafka CR regarding missing `anomaly.notifier.class` property.

Reviewer 3: I would say that it is either a default or missing property warning. Having both makes little sense. If the default is not considered sufficient, make it required.

Author: Yes, we plan to use the `KubernetesEventNotifier` in case no notifier is set so that the request to self-heal are not ignored.

Author: I will get rid of the warning part

> We will support most anomaly fixes however there are some fixes which we don't want self-healing to fix automatically in a Kubernetes context.

Reviewer 3: Can you be specific and list what goals will be and what will not be supported instead of saying `most`?

Also, given what you say below and assuming it does not change -> please make it clear here that they will be just disabled by default while the users can enable them.

Broker failure or disk failure fix are disabled by default since we have better ways to fix them instead of moving the partition replicas across the brokers.
For example, brokers failures are generally due to lack of resources, so we can fix the issue at cluster level and in the same way failed disks can be easily replaced with a new one, so self-healing in these cases can be more resource consuming.

Here is an example of what the configured `Kafka` custom resource could look:

```yaml
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta2
kind: Kafka
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
spec:
  kafka:
    # ...
  cruiseControl:
    config:
      # configuration to enable self-healing for all anomalies
      self.healing.enabled: true
      anomaly.notifer.class: <notifier-class> # can be set to `SelfHealingNotifier, SlackSelfHealingNotifier, AlertaSelfHealingNotifier etc. or you own custom notifier
      self.healing.broker.failure.enabled: false # disables self healing for broker failure
      self.healing.disk.failure.enabled: false # disables self healing for disk failure
```

> The user can still enable self-healing for disk failures and broker failure if they want by setting the  `self.healing.broker.failure.enabled` for broker failure and `self.healing.disk.failure.enabled` for disk failure to `true`.

Reviewer 3: Why? They make zero sense in the Kubernetes context.

I would also expect that if we let the users enable them now, it will be impossible or at least much harder to provide a proper solution for them later as it will need to deal with users who have it enabled.

```yaml
- action: <action>
  apiVersion: v1
  eventTime: "2024-12-19T08:06:21.314140Z"
  firstTimestamp: null
  involvedObject:
    kind: Kafka
    name: <cluster-name>
    namespace: <project-namespace>
  kind: Event
  lastTimestamp: null
  message: Cruise Control is fixing the detected anomaly
  metadata:
    creationTimestamp: "2024-12-19T08:06:21Z"
    generateName: cruise-control-event
    name: my-cluster-34c41626-0add-47a3-9b79-d6ee29d5d81f  # my-cluster-<Anomaly ID>
    namespace: myproject
    resourceVersion: "101070"
    uid: 80892c7d-e3a1-44ad-84dc-2d88e15a7ff0
  reason: Anomaly was detected in the cluster GOAL_VIOLATION # Detected Anomaly type
  related: 
    kind: Pod
    name: <cruise-control-pod-name>
    namespace: <project-namespace>
  reportingComponent: cruise-control
  reportingInstance: cruise-control
  source: {}
  type: Normal
```

### Strimzi Operations while self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly 

#### What happens when self-healing is running/fixing an anomaly and brokers are rolled

When an anomaly is detected, Cruise Control may try to fix/mitigate it by moving the partition replicas across the brokers in the Kafka cluster.

> If, during the process of moving partitions replicas among the brokers in the Kafka cluster, some broker that was being used gets deleted or rolled, then Cruise Control would finish self-healing process and log that `self-healing finished successful with error`.

Reviewer 3: What does `finish` mean in this context? It sounds like it will move a partition replica to a black hole left after a removed broker which would be pretty nasty. I assume it will `stop` the process with an error instead?

Author: so the process is stopped but I don't think the there are any reverts, so its more like incomplete movement. The upstream CC logs still states finished succesful with error. Maybe we shoud get this error message fixed upstream

Since the self-healing process was not completed successfully, it would start again with a new anomalyId to be fixed properly.

#### Self-healing behaviour with KafkaRebalance 

* If self-healing is ongoing and a `KafkaRebalance` resource is created/applied in the middle of it then Cruise Control will still generate an optimization proposal.
The proposal should be based on the cluster shape at that particular timestamp.

> * If self-healing is ongoing and the generated proposal is `approved` then the `KafkaRebalance` resource will move to `NotReady` state, stating that there is already a rebalance ongoing.

Reviewer 3: What if a proposal that is generated before or during self-healing is approved after the self-healing is finished?

Author: that generated proposal will based on old info but yeah I can try this case to know more

      Server returned: Error processing POST request ''/rebalance'' due to: ''java.lang.IllegalStateException:
      Cannot start a new execution while there is an ongoing execution. Please use
      stop_ongoing_execution=true to stop ongoing execution and start a new one.''.'
    reason: CruiseControlRestException
    status: "True"
    type: NotReady
  - lastTransitionTime: "2025-01-08T08:24:01.349653295Z"
    message: 'Wrong annotation value: approve. The rebalance resource supports the
      following annotations in NotReady state: [refresh]'
    reason: InvalidAnnotation
    status: "True"
    type: Warning
  observedGeneration: 1
```

* In case, a manual rebalance is ongoing and self-healing is triggered, then the self-healing process waits till the rebalancing is over.
* If the KafkaRebalance is generated again using the `refresh` annotation in between of self-healing, then a proposal is still generated based on the cluster shape at that particular timestamp.

## Affected/not affected projects

> This change will affect the Strimzi cluster operator and a new repository named `kubernetes-event-notifier` will be added under the Strimzi organisation. 

Reviewer 3: It should probably include the `cruise-control` somewhere in the name? Please also move the information abotu the new repository to the section about the notifier (unless you remove it as I suggest of course). You should also clarify there how it will be distributed (likely through Maven Central?).

#### Anomaly Detector Manager

The anomaly detector manager helps in detecting the anomalies as well as handling them.
It acts as a coordinator between the detector classes as well as the classes which will be handling and resolving the anomalies.
Various detector classes like `GoalViolationDetector`, `DiskFailureDetector`, `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` etc. are used for the anomaly detection, which runs periodically to check if the cluster have their corresponding anomalies or not (The frequency of this check can be easily configured through the `anomaly.detection.interval.ms` configuration).
Detector classes have different mechanisms to detect their corresponding anomalies. For example, `KafkaBrokerFailureDetector` utilises Kafka Metadata API whereas `DiskFailureDetector` and `TopicAnomalyDetector` utilises Kafka Admin API. Furthermore, `MetricAnomalyDetector` and `GoalViolationDetector` uses metrics to detect the anomalies.
The detected anomalies can be of various types:

> * Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals are violated (e.g. DiskUsageDistributionGoal etc.). These goals can be configured independently (through the `self.healing.goals` configuration under the `spec.cruiseControl.config` section) to those used for manual rebalancing(goals configured in the KafkaRebalance custom resource).

Reviewer 2: I think this part confuses me slightly, maybe can be reworded better. 
Is the below what you mean?
* Goal Violation - This happens if certain optimization goals such as `DiskUsageDistributionGoal` are violated.  The optimization goals can be configured independently from `KafkaRebalance` custom resource by using `spec.cruiseControl.config.self.healing.goals` in Kafka custom resource. 

When you say certain optimization goals, are you saying only some would trigger Goal Violation anomaly?

Author: I tried to make the sentence less confusing, I hope its better now

failedDisksByTimeMs={2={/var/lib/kafka/data-1/kafka-log2=1733737786603}}, 
status=FIX_STARTED}]}
```

> where the `anomalyID` represents the task id assigned to the anomaly, `failedDisksByTimeMs` represents the disk which failed, `detectionDate` and `statusUpdateDate` represet the date and time when the anomaly was detected and the status of the anomaly was updated.

Author: I have added some explanation around it

The anomaly status would change based on how the healing progresses. The anomaly can transition to these possible status:
* DETECTED - The anomaly is just detected and no action is yet taken on it 
* IGNORED - Self healing is either disabled or the anomaly is unfixable
* FIX_STARTED - The anomaly fix has started
* FIX_FAILED_TO_START - The proposal generation for the anomaly fix failed 
* CHECK_WITH_DELAY - The anomaly fix is delayed 
* LOAD_MONITOR_NOT_READY - Monitor for workload of a Kafka cluster is in loading or bootstrap state
* COMPLETENESS_NOT_READY - Completeness not met for some goals. The completeness describes the confidence level of the data in the metric sample aggregator. If this is low then some Goal classes may refuse to produce proposals.

> We can again poll the [`state` endpoint](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-state-of-cruise-control), with `substate` parameter as `executor`, to get details on the tasks that are currently being performed by Cruise Control.

Reviewer 2: Will we provide, how users might poll this end point?

Author: By this you mean mentioning the complete curl command?

Author: I have added the curl command to poll the endpoint

  type: Normal

> ```

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/strimzi/proposals/pull/152 - would this proposal have an impact on the format of the Kubernetes event for consistency?

Author: Not sure, the notifier would reside as a separate repo under Strimzi, but I can adapt the events to look like this in the proposal. Wdyt @ppatierno?

Reviewer: Yes we should aim to have consistency across what we'll propose here and what's proposed in #152
